---
layout: page
title: Colophon
---

This is the place to learn a little something about this blog, and
perhaps a peek at how I operate as a developer and as a human.

![Octopress](/images/colophon/octopress.png)

The blog platform I'm using is called [Octopress](http://octopress.org),
which is an extension of the static web framework
[Jekyll](http://github.com/mojombo/jekyll).

That's right: *static*.

This switch away from server-side fiddling will free me from the tyranny
of having all my content locked up in some database out on the 'net,
thus, as my theory goes, freeing me to actually write something once in
a while.

I have never liked writing in WordPress, and frankly, I do rather like
the idea of not having to worry that my site is going to be hacked
because I missed the last 4 WordPress updates.

I will now have complete editorial control of my content locally, and I
can push content to the server when it's ready. It's the opposite of the
usual blog paradigm, in which you edit on the server, never back up your
stuff, and then lose it accidentally because of any number of server
issues. Like what happened to me (although "accidentally" may be a bit
of an exaggeration there).

Because all the generated code is straight HTML, CSS, and JavaScript,
there is no server-side magic to concern myself with, and it really
doesn't matter (as a pre-requisite, anyway) what my web host's
capabilities are, as long as they can serve up HTML really fast.

My favorite part: I can very easily deploy to [GitHub
Pages](http://pages.github.com) or any other server via SSH with a simple
rake command: `rake deploy`

Vim
---

Why am I suddenly so passionate about local authorship? It's because I
use a really sweet text editor. That editor is [Vim](//vim.org).

I won't go into too much detail about my personal Vim setup here (after
all, you can check it out for yourself [on
GitHub](//github.com/smt/dotvim)), but after a lot of tweaking, I'm very
comfortable in my development environment, and it seems very natural to
extend the benefits of using Vim to my writing activities.

I can't count the number of times my muscle-memory has betrayed me into
trying to get some cool Vim command to work some other app. Well, that
ends now. It's Vim or nothing. My co-worker, Vick Aita, once put it like
this:

> Using Vim is like driving stick.

He's right. Vim's definitely not for everyone, but I have come to
appreciate the powerful features that make it a mainstay in the
development world. Many other folks are equally passionate about other
powerful editors like Emacs and TextMate, and more power to them. I
myself was an avid TextMater before making the switch to Vim, and it's a
very fine editor in its own right.

I am quite sure that I'll be blogging about Vim a disproportionate amount
of the time.

Git(Hub)
--------

It's been great to see Git catch on the way it has. Despite having used
it consistently for years, I'm always learning something new about it.
Git has matured and become a major player in the software development
world. And I have to believe that [GitHub](//github.com) has been a prominent
contributor to the broader adoption of Git as *the* SCM of choice.
Nothing against Mercurial, but it's true ;)

I remember when the [Rails project
moved](http://weblog.rubyonrails.org/2008/4/11/rails-premieres-on-github)
from that crappy Trac server to Github. That was a very significant
milestone for both Git and GitHub, and ever since then, I have watched
both explode in popularity.

It may be a little mind-bending to understand at first, but Git's so
fast and efficient, I'll never again use SVN on a personal project. Git
has won me over as a developer, and GitHub has started to play a much
larger role in my professional development as well. Just have a look; it
is now [the dominant repository of open source
projects](http://github.com/blog/865-github-dominates-the-forges) on the web.

Dvorak
------

![Dvorak simplified keyboard](/images/colophon/dvorak.jpg)

In 2007, I made the switch to the [Dvorak keyboard
layout](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dvorak_Simplified_Keyboard). I'd
been struggling with wrist and hand issues, and prospect of 50% less
finger movement appealed to me. In addition, I despised the fact that I
was a big cheater at typing with Qwerty; I always had to peek at the
keys.  This time, I was determined to re-teach myself to touch-type
properly, and starting with a clean slate seemed like a good way to do
it.

The experience reminded me of what I thought it must be like to undergo
physical therapy. It took about 3 months to become roughly as proficient
with Dvorak as I had been with Qwerty. It was a thrilling, rewarding,
and yes, at times frustrating experience, but in the end, I persevered
and came out on the other side with a new skill, having overcome most of
the bad Qwerty typing habits I had picked up over the years.

**If you ever find yourself in a position to remap your brain like this in
some way, I'd encourage you to go for it.** It doesn't have to be learning
Dvorak.  It could be learning a new programming language, training
yourself to run a 10k race, or figuring out how to play a musical
instrument. It doesn't matter. The point is, clich&eacute; though it may
be, it's amazing what you are capable of achieving with a little hard
work and determination.

OS X
----

I use a Mac in all the major contexts of my life. At home, we have a
Mini for media serving. At work, I have a MacBook Pro. Over
the past 5+ years as a Mac user, I have witnessed the evolution of a
truly awesome OS that is as much a pleasure to use as it is to look at.

The initial draw for me was the elegant UI on top of BSD Unix internals.
I have been very comfortable with the Unix command line since college,
and to date, iTerm is my most-frequently used app. Recently, I made
another big switch from bash to zsh, thanks in part to the
[oh-my-zsh](http://github.com/robbyrussell/oh-my-zsh) project. There's
probably a future blog post brewing about that.

Just the fact that I can run Photoshop in one display and MacVim with a
zsh session in the other is about as good as it gets for me.

## Concludophon (or, Tools matter. How they are used matters more.)

With that in mind, I raise my glass to better and more frequent writing
ahead. I endeavor to blog about things of interest to me, of course: the
web industry, rock music, good books I'm reading, stuff like that.

Seriously, though, don't bother subscribing to this RSS feed until you
see a good 10 posts in the [Archives](/blog/archives.html). By then,
you'll know this is for real. I know myself too well by now to make any
promises up front!

Here's to... *the future!*

![Awesome bear dancing](http://bukk.it/beardance.gif)
